
  THE NEW SCIENCE
  OF CONTROLLED
  BREATHING

  The Secret of Strength,
  Energy and Beauty--Through
  Breath Control

  By EDWARD LANKOW

  Leading basso with the Boston, Metropolitan and
  Chicago Opera Companies. World-renowned
  singer and teacher of the new science
  of controlled breathing

  LESSON II

  Controlled Breathing as a Means of Exercise

  CORRECTIVE EATING SOCIETY, Inc.
  47 West Sixteenth Street
  NEW YORK CITY




  Copyright, 1922,
  Corrective Eating Society, Inc.




_LESSON II_

Controlled Breathing as a Means of Exercise


Many theories concerning the art of breathing have been exploited in
recent years. Numerous books dealing with the subject have been offered
to the public. The net results, however, have been unsatisfactory. The
appeal of this propaganda has met with comparatively little response.
The truth as to the importance of right method in breathing may have
been presented, but it has remained valueless, since it has not been
accepted and acted upon by those to whom it was addressed. Perhaps in
great measure the fault lies in the fact that the various advocates of
breath-systems have been too vague in their teachings, have expounded
the theory rather than the practice.

It is for this reason that I have been at pains to describe all
necessary exercises in such detail as to make the practice of them
simple and easy for every reader, I have arranged them in such order
as to make sure a rapid progress toward perfect breath-control, with
its consequent increase in health, beauty, efficiency and happiness.

It seems, indeed, difficult to impress on anybody not familiar with the
wonderful advantages of correct breathing, a full recognition of the
vital bearing breath-control has on the well-being of the individual.
Air is too ridiculously cheap to be much respected by most persons.
And, too, breathing is ordinarily automatic, requiring no thought.
Naturally enough, then, most persons give it no attention, since they
have no realization of its importance.

Nature has provided that all great things should be essentially simple.
It is thus with the process of breathing, which is the chief vital
functioning of the body.

An ancient philosopher has said:

“The more we desire to have that which is superfluous, the more we meet
with difficulties; the more necessary the thing is for living beings,
the more easily it is found and the cheaper it is: air, water and food
are indispensable to man. Air is most necessary, for if man is without
air a few moments he dies, whilst he can be without water a day or
longer. Air is undoubtedly found more easily and is cheaper than water.
Water is more necessary than food, and is proportionately cheaper; and
so on, as to the different kinds of food and luxuries.”

Note well the undeniable fact as asserted by the philosopher, that air
is of the first importance.

If air had to be paid for, or if only a very limited amount were to be
distributed to each consumer, there would be an instant and universal
recognition of its supreme value. Its restriction would compel every
individual to appreciate the unique worth of the true Elixir of Life.


What Mortality Statistics Teach Us

According to statistics of the United States census, the annual death
rate from all causes is one million. Of this number, four hundred
thousand died from diseases of the lungs. The figures demonstrate
that two persons, at least out of every five, come to their death
prematurely--and from a preventable cause.

Another aspect of the truth is gaining wider recognition day by day
throughout the civilized world. This has to do with the appreciation
of fresh air as a fundamental of health. There has been a remarkable
awakening to this effect within a generation. Today, the preferred
treatment of consumptives demands that they shall live out of doors
if possible; the windows in the hospitals are seldom closed; sleeping
porches are built wherever space permits.

It is unfortunately true, however, that there has been little
advancement in general knowledge as to the science, the art, and
practice of correct breathing. Yet, I have been surprised and
gratified by the eager attention of those friends to whom I have made
explanations and given exhibitions during the last few years. Without
an exception, these friends have manifested a keen desire to learn the
secrets of breath-control and to win for themselves the benefits thus
conferred.

In order to broaden my knowledge and to render it exact, I have
made serious studies and experiments through a term of years. I am
convinced that if, instead of gymnasiums, institutions were established
for training in the development of breath-control, the grim death-toll
of one million for one year in our country would dwindle amazingly.


The Gymnastics of Breathing

You must always remember that the correct carriage of the body during
the period of the breathing exercises is a factor of great importance,
since the lungs function variously in accordance with different
postures of the body.

After the fundamental principles of deep breathing are mastered, the
next step is to connect it with different exercises, respectively, of
the arms, the legs, the trunk, and the head. At first it will be found
somewhat difficult to combine attention to the various parts concerned,
but the ability to do this will be readily mastered by practice.

The point involved is that the muscles of the chest have a reflex
action on other muscles. For instance, when the lungs are full of air
all the cells are inflated to the utmost, the chest is stretched, the
diaphragm is drawn down. The various muscles of the chest, of the back
and of the abdomen are in a state of high tension. This tension should
last only during the time in which the breath is held. Moreover, care
must be taken that it shall not influence any other muscles besides
those directly concerned.

When you exercise the arms rhythmically while the breath is being
held, such movement of the arms must not be permitted to influence
the breath. The result to be striven for is an intelligent control
of the muscles, so that the various groups shall be made to act
independently. Every school of gymnastics seeks to attain the same
end--with a difference: In this system of breath-control, the lungs are
trained--the chief requisite for all health, beauty and vigor.

And now that we have given this much of attention to the “Why?” let us
go forward to the “How?” of breath-control.


Preparation for the Exercises

The clothing should be loose, especially around the neck and chest. It
is advisable, when convenient, that the collar should be removed for
the duration of the exercises. The buttons of the coat and vest, too,
should be unfastened. (After a short time it will be found that these
buttons must be placed nearer the edges of the garments.)

The girl or woman who wishes to get the best results from these
exercises should be sure to have no clothing on that may bind her about
the waist, constrict her diaphragm, or press upon her abdominal muscles.

It is almost superfluous to say that she should never attempt her
exercises without, at least, first divesting herself of her corset--if
she wears corsets. It is better to wear merely the comfortable union
suit that so many sensible girls and women now wear. For this affords
perfect freedom of movement and permits every muscle to be properly
tensed and relaxed by the deep breathing exercises, and the gymnastic
movements that accompany them.

The first requirement throughout all the exercises is a preliminary
releasing from the lungs of the old, dead air, which is a continual
source of self-poisoning. This accumulation must be driven out from
the points of the lungs before the new breath is taken. It is repeated
also on the conclusion of all the exercises. It must never be neglected.


The Cleansing Breath

EXPLANATION IN DETAIL

This exercise prefaces and ends every exercise in breathing. By
prefacing an exercise, it makes space in the lungs for a capacity
volume of new breath; by ending an exercise, it serves the important
function of relaxing the whole body. It should be studied very
carefully.

Exhale (blow out) energetically, saying “ss” between the teeth.
Exaggerate the hissing sound of “s”. This protects the throat. While
doing this, bring shoulders and head forward as in Photograph 1 (a).
This helps to press out that air which is never entirely removed from
the lungs. We call this the residual air.

After exhaling all you can, begin the second part of this exercise by
doing the opposite. Inhale slowly through the nose, gradually bringing
the out-stretched arms overhead, performing a circle; also bring head
and shoulders back, filling the lungs in all parts to great capacity.
See Photograph 1 (b). Pause for one or two seconds, and relax suddenly.
This is difficult to do correctly. To relax suddenly means to relax
with a crash--the breath escapes at once, the arms fall, the knees bend
and all this must take place together. With well-opened mouth you say
“Ha!” to help make the breath escape quickly.

This very important sudden relaxation may lack snap and precision at
first, but after a few days the mind will become trained to its action.
After this relaxation take two shorter breaths in the same way then
pause before repeating.


The Cleansing Breath

IN CONDENSED FORM

Position: Erect, with arms at side.

 (a) Exhale (blow out) quickly, saying “ss.” See Photograph 1 (a).

 (b) Inhale through nose, lifting arms to front.

 (c) Hold breath as in position, Photograph 1 (b).

 (d) Exhale suddenly “Ha,” bringing arms down to sides.

 (e) Two short cleansing breaths. Pause ten seconds before repeating.

Ordinarily, do this exercise six to eight times, with pauses between.


The Short Controlled Breath

EXPLANATION IN DETAIL

Exhale first as shown in Photograph 1 (the cleansing breath). This
precedes every exercise.

After the cleansing breath, inhale through the nose, while placing
the hands lightly on hips, as in Photograph 2. Hold the breath a few
seconds and open the mouth. Do not permit any breath to escape. The
opening of the mouth proves to yourself that there is no contraction
at the throat; instead, the diaphragm is holding the breath. Now,
exhale, saying “ss” between the teeth, with relaxed throat. It is very
important to observe that the chest is held high for the first half of
expiration. Then let it quickly sink with the breath, and take two or
three quick cleansing breaths.

Observe that the shoulders do not rise while inhaling--that you really
inhale, not that you stretch the chest muscles and lift the shoulders,
as I have seen even athletes do, when asked to take a deep breath.
Besides opening the mouth during the period of held breath, it would be
well to turn the neck several times to prove its freedom from tension.


The Short Controlled Breath

IN CONDENSED FORM

Position: Erect, with arms at sides.

 (a) Exhale as in Exercise One, saying “ss.”

 (b) Inhale through nose, placing hands on hips as in Photograph 2.

 (c) Hold breath one to four seconds; open mouth.

 (d) Exhale “ss” first holding chest high, then letting it sink slowly
     with breath.

 (e) Two to three cleansing breaths. Pause before repeating.

To be done five or six times with pauses.


The Climax Breath

EXPLANATION IN DETAIL

This exercise is the most difficult of all breathing gymnastics, and
should not be attempted by the sick. It requires great endurance. Even
an athlete should not attempt it, until the others are well in hand.

The first part is exactly like the exercise marked “The Short
Controlled Breath.” But in the second part, instead of expelling the
air suddenly, you proceed to exhale very slowly (after holding the
breath a few seconds). Care should be taken to see that the upper chest
is held high as long as possible while exhaling. With the last atom of
breath leaving the lungs, drop (relax) the shoulders and whole frame.
Quickly take two or three more cleansing breaths to quiet the heart and
lungs.

When one is ready for this strenuous exercise, it becomes a great force
for building breadth and depth to the chest, and new inner vitality.

During the first few weeks one performance of this exercise is enough
for the day. After the second month, two exercises per day, fifth
month, three exercises per day, etc., very gradually increasing the
number.


The Climax Breath

IN CONDENSED FORM

 (a) Exhale “ss.”

 (b) Inhale slowly. “Hiss” through smallest opening of lips and closed
     teeth. Place hands on diaphragm, as in Photograph 3.

 (c) Hold breath several seconds.

 (d) Exhale slowly “ss” through small opening of lips and teeth.

 (e) Several cleaning breaths. =Long= pause.

This is never to be performed more than twice at one time, during the
first two months.

With girls or women who are inclined to stoutness, it may sometimes
be well to place the hands immediately under the busts--slightly
supporting the breasts--instead of on the hips.

It will be found that the “relaxing” movements can thus be performed
with more comfort--until such time as the muscles supporting the busts
gain in strength and elasticity.

Care should be taken at first not to take in too much breath, nor to
hold the breath too long. This matter, however, is entirely individual.
Naturally, a greater amount of care must be exercised by a delicate
child or by a consumptive than by a healthy youth.

And right here it should be emphasized that, if you are a business man,
sitting for long hours every day at a desk, you should, in order to
derive the maximum amount of good from these breathing exercises, plan
to stand up, near the open window and spend a few minutes practicing
some of these simple exercises.

You will often find that what you thought was the fatigue of overwork
is nothing more or less than staying too long in a close atmosphere,
and making an insufficient use of your organs of respiration.

The feeling of freshness these exercises will impart, the increased
vigor and the enhanced clearness of mind that will come to you, will
prove a grateful source of surprise.

Many men, formerly in the habit of visiting for a cocktail, take a few
deep breaths in this scientific manner. They claim that this Fresh Air
Cocktail is better than any coffee or liquor stimulant. And it can be
certain that nothing but good effects can ever follow it.

By this system of breathing you can build up a wonderful physique. You
can become strong and active, and have a superabundance of health and
vitality--and without spending more than a few minutes a day at your
breathing exercises. After a short time the _habit_ for slow, deep
breathing is formed, and as with all habits, it requires no attention
whatsoever.


Hints for Controlled Breathing

It should go almost without saying that to get the _best_ effects from
air you should breathe the purest air obtainable.

Air which is full of dust particles, for instance, may be actually
irritating to the delicate mucous membrane that lines the nose, throat,
bronchial tubes and air cells of the lungs.

This dust contains particles of organic matter derived from the
excrement of horses and dogs, from dried atoms of offal and decaying
vegetable matter, or from dried mud impregnated with urine.

Indeed, it is very largely upon these particles that the
micro-organisms--arch enemies of mankind as well as of animal kind--are
carried on their errand of destruction.

These micro-organisms are most abundant in the air of inhabited
rooms--and the more people in the room the greater the number of
microbes present.

So don’t be afraid of open windows--day or night. Remember Florence
Nightingale’s quaint observation, “Windows are made to be opened.”


Always Breathe Through the Nose

It should be remembered, also, that so far as possible, all inhalation
of air should be through the nose. This is for two very important
reasons.

First, the fine hairs lining the nasal passages act as a sieve through
which the inspired air is strained.

Further than this the lower turbinated bodies in the nose, and the
lower half of the middle turbinates are covered with tiny cells
(ciliated tissue) protruding from the membrane covering of the
turbinates.

These cells catch and hold any particles of dust or other matter that
may have slipped through the hair screen of the nostrils. Thus dust,
germs and other harmful material are removed from the air currents, and
prevented from reaching the lung cells.

The next most important reason is that the chambers of the nose, with
their wonderfully rich blood supply, act as temperature regulators.

If you breathe air at zero temperature through the nose it is actually
warmed to body temperature before it passes into the bronchial tubes.

If you were to breathe desert air, or the air of a blast furnace heated
to 130 degrees--this superheated air would be cooled approximately to
body temperature before it was passed into the lung cells.

If there is a tendency to breathe through the mouth, this will be
manifested most decidedly at night, when you are asleep, and the
muscles are relaxed.

If you find that you are in the habit of sleeping with the mouth
open--awakening in the morning with a dry, harsh throat, it might be
well to adopt the device which Dr. William H. Fitzgerald introduced to
the medical profession almost 20 years ago.

This consists merely in applying a small piece of surgeon’s adhesive
plaster over the closed lips, keeping them closed during all the hours
of the night.

The court-plaster can be applied lengthwise over the lips; or it can
be pasted across the lips, holding them firmly in the closed position.
Many find the latter method the most practical.

The more fresh air you can get in your home, your office or school or
workshop, or wherever you may have to spend your day time--the better
off you’ll be.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Emboldened text is surrounded by equals signs: =bold=.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

References are made in the text to photographs, although no photographs
  appear in the original.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The New Science of Controlled
Breathing, Vol. 2 (of 2), by Edward Lankow

